README.md, before:

# TorchSpec

TorchSpec is a torch-native speculative decoding training framework. We introduce a disaggregated way of training speculative decoding draft models where inference and training are fully decoupled and stream hidden states directly from inference engine groups to distributed training workers via Mooncake (RDMA/TCP) store, allowing each side to scale independently.

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/torchspec_architecture.png" alt="TorchSpec Architecture" width="100%">
</p>

## Setup

```bash
./tools/build_conda.sh
micromamba activate torchspec
```

To install into your current environment instead: `./tools/build_conda.sh current`

Optional — install Flash Attention:

```bash
pip install -e ".[fa]"
```

## Quick Start

Train an Eagle3 draft model for Qwen3-8B using inference engine (4 GPUs: 2 training + 2 inference):

```bash
./examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/run.sh
```

Override any config value via CLI:

```bash
./examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/run.sh training.learning_rate=5e-5 training.num_train_steps=500
```

## Examples

| Example | Backend | Model |
|---------|---------|-------|
| [hf-quickstart](examples/hf-quickstart/) | HuggingFace | Qwen3-8B |
| [qwen3-8b-single-node](examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/) | Inference Engine | Qwen3-8B |
| [kimi-k25-2node-h200](examples/kimi-k25-2node-h200/) | Inference Engine | Kimi-K2.5 |
| [kimi-k25-3node-h100](examples/kimi-k25-3node-h100/) | Inference Engine | Kimi-K2.5 |

See [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) for details.

## Checkpoint Conversion

Convert an FSDP checkpoint to HuggingFace format:

```bash
python tools/convert_to_hf.py --input-dir ./outputs/my_experiment/iter_0010000/
```

Vocabulary pruning — reducing the draft model's `lm_head` to a smaller token set and emitting `d2t`/`t2d` mappings — can be applied either **during training** (pre-pruning) or **at conversion time** (post-pruning):

- **Pre-pruning**: set `draft_vocab_size` in your training config. The checkpoint already contains the pruned `lm_head` and `d2t`/`t2d` buffers. Use the basic conversion command above — no extra flags needed.

- **Post-pruning**: train with the full vocabulary, then prune at conversion time by passing `--prune-vocab` along with a representative dataset to compute token frequencies:

```bash
python tools/convert_to_hf.py \
    --input-dir ./outputs/my_experiment/iter_0010000/ \
    --prune-vocab \
    --dataset-path Aeala/ShareGPT_Vicuna_unfiltered \
    --draft-vocab-size 32000 \
    --tokenizer Qwen/Qwen3-8B \
    --chat-template qwen \
    --prompt-key conversations
```

Pass `--cache-dir ./cache` to reuse the tokenized dataset cache from training.

## Metrics Reporting

W&B logging is disabled by default (`report_to: none`). To enable it, set `report_to: wandb` in your config and supply your API key.

## Troubleshooting

Set `TORCHSPEC_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG` for verbose logging when diagnosing issues:

```bash
TORCHSPEC_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG ./examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/run.sh
```

| Issue | Reference |
|-------|-----------|
| Stuck or failing distributed runs, Ray actor errors | [docs/debugging_ray_jobs.md](docs/debugging_ray_jobs.md) |
| Ray cluster setup, actor hierarchy, placement groups | [docs/ray.md](docs/ray.md) |
| Pipeline bottlenecks, slow steps, throughput analysis | [docs/performance_metrics.md](docs/performance_metrics.md) |

Commit message:

[Feature] add per-role file logging (#18)
* feat: add per-role file logging with TORCHSPEC_LOG_DIR

Add setup_file_logging() that writes per-role/per-node/per-rank log
files when TORCHSPEC_LOG_DIR is set. Wire it through inference engines
(HF, SGL), the factory (engine_group param), and the trainer actor.

* add readme

* add guard to remove handlers

README.md, after:

# TorchSpec

TorchSpec is a torch-native speculative decoding training framework. We introduce a disaggregated way of training speculative decoding draft models where inference and training are fully decoupled and stream hidden states directly from inference engine groups to distributed training workers via Mooncake (RDMA/TCP) store, allowing each side to scale independently.

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/torchspec_architecture.png" alt="TorchSpec Architecture" width="100%">
</p>

## Setup

```bash
./tools/build_conda.sh
micromamba activate torchspec
```

To install into your current environment instead: `./tools/build_conda.sh current`

Optional — install Flash Attention:

```bash
pip install -e ".[fa]"
```

## Quick Start

Train an Eagle3 draft model for Qwen3-8B using inference engine (4 GPUs: 2 training + 2 inference):

```bash
./examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/run.sh
```

Override any config value via CLI:

```bash
./examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/run.sh training.learning_rate=5e-5 training.num_train_steps=500
```

## Examples

| Example | Backend | Model |
|---------|---------|-------|
| [hf-quickstart](examples/hf-quickstart/) | HuggingFace | Qwen3-8B |
| [qwen3-8b-single-node](examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/) | Inference Engine | Qwen3-8B |
| [kimi-k25-2node-h200](examples/kimi-k25-2node-h200/) | Inference Engine | Kimi-K2.5 |
| [kimi-k25-3node-h100](examples/kimi-k25-3node-h100/) | Inference Engine | Kimi-K2.5 |

See [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) for details.

## Checkpoint Conversion

Convert an FSDP checkpoint to HuggingFace format:

```bash
python tools/convert_to_hf.py --input-dir ./outputs/my_experiment/iter_0010000/
```

Vocabulary pruning — reducing the draft model's `lm_head` to a smaller token set and emitting `d2t`/`t2d` mappings — can be applied either **during training** (pre-pruning) or **at conversion time** (post-pruning):

- **Pre-pruning**: set `draft_vocab_size` in your training config. The checkpoint already contains the pruned `lm_head` and `d2t`/`t2d` buffers. Use the basic conversion command above — no extra flags needed.

- **Post-pruning**: train with the full vocabulary, then prune at conversion time by passing `--prune-vocab` along with a representative dataset to compute token frequencies:

```bash
python tools/convert_to_hf.py \
    --input-dir ./outputs/my_experiment/iter_0010000/ \
    --prune-vocab \
    --dataset-path Aeala/ShareGPT_Vicuna_unfiltered \
    --draft-vocab-size 32000 \
    --tokenizer Qwen/Qwen3-8B \
    --chat-template qwen \
    --prompt-key conversations
```

Pass `--cache-dir ./cache` to reuse the tokenized dataset cache from training.

## Metrics Reporting

W&B logging is disabled by default (`report_to: none`). To enable it, set `report_to: wandb` in your config and supply your API key.

## Troubleshooting

Set `TORCHSPEC_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG` for verbose logging when diagnosing issues:

```bash
TORCHSPEC_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG ./examples/qwen3-8b-single-node/run.sh
```

### Per-Rank File Logging

Set `TORCHSPEC_LOG_DIR` to an <b> absolute path </b> on a shared filesystem (NFS) to enable per-rank log files for every Ray actor (training and inference):

```bash
export TORCHSPEC_LOG_DIR=/my_project/running_logs
```

This creates a structured directory with one file per actor, organized by role and node:

```
running_logs/
  training/
    10.0.0.1/
      training_g0_rank0_20260301_080012.log
      training_g0_rank1_20260301_080012.log
    10.0.0.2/
      training_g0_rank2_20260301_080013.log
  inference/
    10.0.0.1/
      inference_g0_rank0_20260301_080014.log
    10.0.0.2/
      inference_g0_rank1_20260301_080015.log
```

The path must be an absolute path on a shared filesystem (NFS) accessible from all nodes. If `TORCHSPEC_LOG_DIR` is not set or the path is not writable, per-rank file logging is disabled and only Ray's default stdout/stderr capture is used.

| Issue | Reference |
|-------|-----------|
| Stuck or failing distributed runs, Ray actor errors | [docs/debugging_ray_jobs.md](docs/debugging_ray_jobs.md) |
| Ray cluster setup, actor hierarchy, placement groups | [docs/ray.md](docs/ray.md) |
| Pipeline bottlenecks, slow steps, throughput analysis | [docs/performance_metrics.md](docs/performance_metrics.md) |
